>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JUNE 5:
AHEAD OF TUESDAY'S PRIMARIES,
HILLARY CLINTON INCHES CLOSER TO
THE DEMOCRATIC NOMINATION.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WHY
IMMIGRATION ISSUES IN CALIFORNIA
MAY BE A SIGN OF THINGS TO COME
FOR THE REST OF THE NATION.
AND, ARE U.S. EFFORTS TO IMPROVE
THE IRAQI ARMY WORKING?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATION
CAMPAIGN THAT BEGAN LAST
FEBRUARY IN IOWA IS NEARING THE
FINISH LINE AND HILLARY CLINTON
IS COMING CLOSER TO CLINCHING
THE DEMOCRATIC NOMINATION THAT
WOULD FIND HER FACING DONALD
TRUMP IN THE FALL.
SHE WON THE CAUCUS IN THE
VIRGIN ISLANDS AND ALL SEVEN
DELEGATES THERE.
PUERTO RICANS VOTED TODAY,
WITH 60 DELEGATES AT STAKE.
EARLY RESULTS SHOW CLINTON WITH
A WIDE LEAD OVER SANDERS.
SHE COULD CONCEIVABLY HAVE
ENOUGH TO CLINCH THE NOMINATION
IS IF VERY WINS 85% OF THE VOTE
IN PUERTO RICO.
VOTERS IN NEW JERSEY, CALIFORNIA
AND FOUR OTHER STATES ARE
EXPECTED TO WIN HER ENOUGH
DELEGATES TO RISE HER ABOVE
THE NECESSARY 2,383.
A NEWS CONFERENCE THAT HE PLANS
TO GO AFTER CLINTON'S
SUPERDELEGATES.
THESE ARE DELEGATES WHO'VE
PLEDGED, BUT AREN'T OBLIGATED
TO SUPPORT CLINTON AT NEXT
MONTH'S DEMOCRATIC CONVENTION IN
PHILADELPHIA.
SANDERS CALLED ON THE MEDIA NOT
TO DECLARE CLINTON THE NOMINEE
AFTER TUESDAY'S VOTING.
BOTH SANDERS AND CLINTON SPENT
THE WEEKEND CAMPAIGNING FOR
TUESDAY'S PRIMARY IN CALIFORNIA.
THE STATE'S REPUBLICAN PARTY
WILL ALSO HOLD ITS PRIMARY THAT
DAY.
AND WHILE IMMIGRATION HAS TAKEN
UP A LOT OF TIME ON THE CAMPAIGN
TRAIL, LIKELY DEMOCRATIC AND
REPUBLICAN VOTERS IN CALIFORNIA
AGREE: TERRORISM AND THE ECONOMY
ARE THE TOP ISSUES.
CALIFORNIA HAS ALSO UNDERGONE
DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGES OVER THE
PAST TWO DECADES THAT HAVE MADE
THE STATE ONE OF THE MOST
RELIABLE FOR DEMOCRATS.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD REPORTS ON HOW
CALIFORNIA POLITICS MAY BE AN
INDICATION OF THINGS TO COME FOR
THE NATION.
>> YOU KNOW THAT THIS PRIMARY IN
CALIFORNIA ON JUNE 7 IS REALLY
IMPORTANT, BECAUSE CALIFORNIA IS
ALL ABOUT THE FUTURE!
>> Reporter: DOES EVERYTHING
THAT HAPPENS IN AMERICA HAPPEN
FIRST HERE IN CALIFORNIA?
MAYBE NOT EVERYTHING, BUT A LOT
SURE HAS-- AND DOES.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL MOVEMENT, FOR
EXAMPLE, GOT A HUGE JUMP START
AFTER A MASSIVE OIL SPILL OFF
THE COAST OF SANTA BARBARA IN
1969.
OTHER EXAMPLES DATE BACK MORE
THAN A CENTURY, AND A COUPLE ARE
HIGHLY RELEVANT TODAY.
FROM THE PROGRESSIVE ERA MORE
THAN A HUNDRED YEARS AGO, TO THE
STUDENT REVOLTS OF THE 1960S, TO
THE TAX REVOLT OF THE 70S,
CALIFORNIA HAS OFTEN BEEN AN
EARLY WARNING SYSTEM, JUST AS IT
MAY BE ABOUT A HOT BUTTON
POLITICAL ISSUE IN THIS YEAR'S
CAMPAIGN.
>> WHEN MEXICO SENDS ITS PEOPLE,
THEY'RE NOT SENDING THEIR BEST.
THEY'RE BRINGING DRUGS.
THEY'RE BRINGING CRIME.
THEY'RE RAPISTS.
AND SOME, I ASSUME, ARE GOOD
PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: SOON AFTER THOSE
INCENDIARY WORDS ABOUT
IMMIGRATION, TRUMP VAULTED INTO
FIRST PLACE IN THE POLLS, A
POSITION HE NEVER YIELDED.
BUT THEY ECHO AN ARGUMENT HEARD
MORE THAN 20 YEARS AGO THAT
HELPED WIN AN ELECTION IN
CALIFORNIA, AND CHANGE THE
POLITICAL CONTOURS OF THIS STATE
IN WAYS THAT MIGHT BE A PORTENT
FOR THE NATION.
SEEKING RE-ELECTION IN 1994,
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR PETE WILSON
WAS FACING A BATTERED ECONOMY,
AND A STATE BUDGET STRAINED BY A
WAVE OF IMMIGRANTS-LEGAL AND
NOT-CROWDING SCHOOLS AND
HOSPITALS.
HE TOOK A HARDLINE ANTI-
IMMIGRATION STANCE, TO DENY
ALMOST ALL STATE SERVICES TO
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS, AND
EMBRACED A STATE BALLOT MEASURE,
PROPOSITION 187,
THAT WOULD HAVE DONE JUST THAT.
THE PROP 187 AD CAMPAIGN WAS
UNSPARING.
>> THEY KEEP COMING.
TWO MILLION ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS
IN CALIFORNIA.
>> Reporter: WILSON WON RE-
ELECTION-AND PROP 187 PASSED
WITH 60% OF THE VOTE.
BUT THAT ELECTION GALVANIZED THE
LATINO COMMUNITY AND SHIFTED THE
STATE'S POLITICS.
LATINOS ARE NOW THE STATE'S
LARGEST ETHNIC GROUP, MORE THAN
38% OF CALIFORNIANS, AND EVEN
WITH A LOWER TURNOUT RATE THAN
WHITE AND BLACK VOTERS, LATINOS
HAVE AN INCREASING SHARE OF THE
ACTUAL VOTE IN CALIFORNIA'S
ELECTIONS-- ABOUT 20% IN THE
LAST PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
MANUEL PASTOR HEADS THE CENTER
FOR THE STUDY OF IMMIGRANT
INTEGRATION AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA.
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S IMPORTANT TO
REALIZE THAT THE DEMOGRAPHIC
CHANGE IN CALIFORNIA BETWEEN
1980 AND 2000 IS BASICALLY THE
DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGE THE UNITED
STATES IS GOING THROUGH BETWEEN
2000 AND 2050.
>> Reporter: THE U.S. CENSUS
BUREAU PROJECTS THAT BY 2050,
THE LATINO POPULATION WILL MORE
THAN DOUBLE, AND BECOME 26% OF
THE COUNTRY.
>> A MOBILIZATION OF THE LATINO
COMMUNITY, A RUSH TOWARD
NATURALIZATION, AND A RUSH
TOWARD CIVIC ENGAGEMENT AND
VOTER ENGAGEMENT ON THE PART OF
THESE NEWLY NATURALIZED
CITIZENS.
THAT TRANSFORMED THE POLITICS OF
CALIFORNIA.
>> Reporter: WHAT HAPPENED IN
THE LAST 22 YEARS IS THAT
CALIFORNIA EFFECTIVELY BECAME A
ONE-PARTY STATE.
THE ONLY EXCEPTION BEING
GOVERNOR ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER,
A STRONG PROPONENT OF
IMMIGRATION REFORM, BY THE WAY.
TODAY, EVERY MAJOR STATEWIDE
OFFICIAL IN CALIFORNIA IS
DEMOCRAT.
THE PARTY HOLDS HUGE MAJORITIES
IN THE STATE LEGISLATURE AND
CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATION.
AND CALIFORNIA HAS VOTED
DEMOCRATIC IN EVERY PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION SINCE 1992.
THIS REPUBLICAN DECLINE COULD
SPREAD IF THE PARTY DOES NOT
REVERSE COURSE, ACCORDING TO
LONGTIME CALIFORNIA REPUBLICAN
POLICY ADVISOR MIKE MADRID.
SO YOU'VE SEEN IN YOUR ADULT
LIFE, AS A REPUBLICAN,
CALIFORNIA GO FROM A COMPETITIVE
STATE TO POSSIBLY WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF SCHWARZENEGGER, IS
ONE OF THE BLUEST STATES THERE
IS.
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: TO WHAT EXTENT DO
YOU THINK THE IMMIGRATION ISSUE
HELPED PROPEL CALIFORNIA IN THAT
DIRECTION?
>> OH, THERE'S A DIRECT
CORRELATION, THERE'S NO QUESTION
ABOUT IT.
THE MID-1990S WERE REALLY A
DEFINITIVE TIME FOR THE PARTY--
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY OF
CALIFORNIA.
AND I THINK THAT'S REALLY A
PRECURSOR, A PREVIEW OF WHAT'S
LIKELY TO COME NATIONALLY.
>> Reporter: JUST AS IMPORTANT,
THE STATE'S VIEW OF IMMIGRANTS
HAS UNDERGONE A FUNDAMENTAL
CHANGE.
DAN SCHNUR, WAS GOVERNOR
WILSON'S CHIEF SPOKESMAN AND HAS
SPENT HIS CAREER IN CALIFORNIA
REPUBLICAN POLITICS.
HE NOW DIRECTS A THINK TANK AT
U.S.C.
>> A YOUNG CALIFORNIAN WHO WENT
TO SCHOOL GREW UP IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD OF PEOPLE OF A
WHOLE RANGE OF RACES AND
ETHNICITIES, THEY DON'T THINK OF
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRATION AS A
CRISIS, OR EVEN A PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: THE PRESUMPTIVE
NOMINEE OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY
IS NOT, DOES NOT APPEAR TO BE
SHARING THAT VIEW.
SO WHAT DOES THAT PORTEND FOR
THE PARTY?
>> WELL, THERE'S A GROWING
NUMBER OF REPUBLICANS WHO DO
BELIEVE THAT THE PARTY HAS TO
CHANGE ITS APPROACH ON ISSUES
RELATING TO IMMIGRATION REFORM.
THAT SAID, WHEN PRO-IMMIGRATION
REFORM REPUBLICANS TALK, THEY
TEND TO FRAME THE ISSUE NOT AS
AN ECONOMIC OR A SOCIAL OR A
MORAL IMPERATIVE.
THEY'RE BEING TOLD IT'S A
POLITICAL NECESSITY TO HELP
ELECT PEOPLE TO OFFICE WHO
THEY'LL NEVER MEET TO SERVE A
PARTY WITH WHICH THEY'RE
BECOMING INCREASINGLY
DISENCHANTED.
>> Reporter: BACK WHEN
PROPOSITION 187 PASSED, ANGELICA
SALAS, A CHILD OF UNDOCUMENTED
MEXICANS, DECIDED TO GET
INVOLVED IN POLITICS-- SHE IS
NOW EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
COALITION FOR HUMANE IMMIGRANT
RIGHTS OF LOS ANGELES.
>> 50% OF THE POPULATION OF
CALIFORNIA IS EITHER AN
IMMIGRANT OR A CHILD OF
IMMIGRANTS.
SO WHAT THE STATE REALLY SEES
ITSELF AS AN IMMIGRANT STATE,
AND THAT IF WE'RE GOING TO
ADVANCE COLLECTIVELY, NOT JUST
FOR IMMIGRANTS, BUT
COLLECTIVELY, THAT WE HAVE TO
EMBRACE IMMIGRANT INTEGRATION.
>> THIS IS CESAR CHAVEZ AND
THAT'S ME WHEN I WAS 25 YEARS
OLD AND TED KENNEDY.
>> Reporter: PART OF THAT
INTEGRATION CAN BE SEEN IN THE
CORRIDORS OF POWER.
WHEN ART TORRES WAS FIRST
ELECTED TO THE LEGISLATURE IN
1974, HE WAS ONE OF THE FEW
LATINOS IN SACRAMENTO.
>> THEN THERE WAS ONLY THREE
LATINOS IN THE ASSEMBLY AND ONLY
TWO IN THE STATE SENATE.
NOW, WE HAVE CLOSE TO 26.
WHAT'S ACCOUNTED FOR THAT IS
REAPPORTIONMENT AND ALSO
INCREASED VOTER REGISTRATION IN
THOSE DISTRICTS WHICH HAD A
PROPENSITY-- TO HAVE A LARGER
LATINO COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: THIS SPRING,
VOLUNTEERS FROM SALAS'S
ORGANIZATION HAVE BEEN KNOCKING
ON DOORS IN THOSE COMMUNITIES,
URGING LEGAL IMMIGRANTS TO
BECOME NATURALIZED CITIZENS, AND
TO VOTE.
THAT'S HAPPENING NOT JUST IN
CALIFORNIA, BUT ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
LATINOS NATIONWIDE ARE EXPECTED
TO COME OUT TO VOTE IN RECORD
NUMBERS THIS FALL-- OVER 13
MILLION VOTERS, BY ONE ESTIMATE,
UP FROM 11.2 MILLION IN THE LAST
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
>> WHAT I SEE FOR THE REST OF
THE NATION IS THAT WE'RE GOING
THROUGH THIS SITUATION WHERE
CERTAIN POLITICIANS THINK THAT
IN ORDER TO WIN THEY NEED TO
ATTACK US.
THEY NEED TO OFFEND US.
AND I THINK THAT THAT IS
ACTUALLY GOING TO BACKFIRE ON
THEM.
>> Reporter: BETWEEN A SHIFT IN
DEMOGRAPHICS AND ATTITUDES,
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS HAVE
FOUND A FAR FRIENDLIER CLIMATE
IN CALIFORNIA THAN TWO DECADES
AGO.
PROPOSITION 187 NEVER WENT INTO
EFFECT; PERMANENTLY BLOCKED BY A
FEDERAL JUDGE'S INJUNCTION.
LATER UNDER A DEMOCRATIC
LEGISLATURE, LAWS WERE PASSED TO
LET UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS
OBTAIN DRIVER'S LICENSES, PAY
DISCOUNTED IN-STATE TUITION AT
STATE UNIVERSITIES, AND HAVE
THEIR CHILDREN'S MEDICAL BILLS
PAID BY MEDICAID.
IN STATE POLITICS, THE HARSH
ANTI-IMMIGRATION RHETORIC HAS
ALL BUT DISAPPEARED.
BUT THE PREVAILING VIEW IN
CALIFORNIA-THAT THE IMMIGRATION
ISSUE HAS BEEN COMPLETELY
RESOLVED-IS NOT UNANIMOUS.
>> WELL, THE BIG EQUATION IS
ECONOMICS.
>> Reporter: SCHOLAR AND AUTHOR
JOEL KOTKIN ARGUES THAT
UNSKILLED IMMIGRANTS CAME TO
CALIFORNIA DURING A
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION
BOOM THAT HAS SINCE EBBED, AND
THAT THE STATE'S ECONOMY COULD
END UP PAYING THE PRICE FOR ITS
LARGE UNEMPLOYED AND
UNDOCUMENTED POPULATION.
>> THE ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES
ARE RATHER POOR.
SO WHAT YOU HAVE IS, YOU HAVE A
POPULATION THAT'S ALMOST
ISOLATED, YOU KNOW, WITH ALMOST
NO WAY OUT FOR MANY OF THEM.
MAYBE FOR THEIR CHILDREN, BUT
MAYBE NOT FOR THEM.
>> Reporter: IS THIS PUTTING A
VERY HEAVY BURDEN ON STATE
RESOURCES?
>> WELL, IT'S A TREMENDOUS
BURDEN ON THE STATE.
WE'RE GOING TO START TO SEE IT
MOVE PARTICULARLY IN THE AREA OF
HOUSING, WHERE THERE'S A LOT OF
PRESSURE NOW TO BUILD
SUBSIDIZED, LOW-INCOME HOUSING
FOR THIS SAME POPULATION.
AND WHEN THE ECONOMY WEAKENS
AGAIN AS IT WILL, I THINK
THEY'RE GOING TO BE VERY
VULNERABLE.
>> Reporter: FORMER STATE
LEGISLATOR TORRES, WHO ALSO
CHAIRED THE STATE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY FOR MORE THAN A DECADE,
BELIEVES THAT CALIFORNIA'S LARGE
IMMIGRANT POPULATION BENEFITS
THE STATE'S ECONOMY.
HE ARGUES THAT SOME OF THE
CONSERVATIVE TALKING POINTS ON
IMMIGRATION ARE WRONG.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE NUMBER OF
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS IN
CALIFORNIA HAS FALLEN 11% SINCE
2010.
TORRES SAYS THAT'S DUE IN PART
TO LOWER BIRTH RATES AND A
GROWING ECONOMY IN MEXICO, AS
WELL AS AN INCREASE IN U.S.
BORDER ENFORCEMENT.
>> THOSE THREE FACTORS, I THINK,
HAVE ALL CONTRIBUTED TO A
SUBSTANTIALLY LOWER--
IMMIGRATION, ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION
INTO THE UNITED STATES SO THAT
THOSE PEOPLE WHO CALL FOR A WALL
OR OTHER KINDS OF ATTITUDES,
IT'S NOT NECESSARY.
>> Reporter: IF THERE'S NO
CONSENSUS ABOUT THE IMPACT OF
IMMIGRATION ON CALIFORNIA'S
LONG-TERM ECONOMY, THERE CLEARLY
IS ONE ABOUT THE POLITICAL
LESSONS CALIFORNIA HAS FOR THE
NATION, WHERE THE TOUGH
IMMIGRATION LINE THAT WORKED IN
ONE ELECTION PROVED DISASTROUS
FOR THE REPUBLICANS IN WHAT
FOLLOWED.
>> JUST AS WE WERE STARTING TO
SEE THE PROP 187, GOVERNOR
WILSON DAYS DISAPPEAR AND, YOU
KNOW, BARELY VISIBLE IN THE
REARVIEW MIRROR, UP COMES THIS
NEW NATIONAL DYNAMIC OF THE
TRUMP CANDIDACY AND EVERYTHING
THAT COMES WITH IT-- WHICH IS
REALLY BRANDING-- EVERYTHING BAD
ABOUT THE REPUBLICAN PARTY INTO
THE MINDS OF A NEW YOUNG
GENERATION OF LATINOS, WHICH ARE
GOING TO BE THE LARGEST, FASTEST
GROWING OF THE ELECTORATE.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEW
INVESTIGATION BY THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS FINDS THAT HATE-CRIMES IN
THE UNITED STATES ARE
SIGNIFICANTLY UNDER-COUNTED IN
ANNUAL FBI STATISTICS.
BETWEEN 2009 AND 2014, THE A.P.
FOUND THAT MORE THAN 2,700
POLICE AND SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENTS
DID NOT SUBMIT A SINGLE HATE
CRIME REPORT TO THE F.B.I.
THAT'S ABOUT 17% OF THE NATION'S
CITY AND COUNTY LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES.
THE INVESTIGATION FOUND THAT AT
THOUSANDS MORE AGENCIES,
REPORTING WAS INCONSISTENT, WITH
HATE-CRIMES REPORTED ONLY SOME
YEARS, OR PARTS OF THE YEAR.
THE MAJORITY OF PLACES
NEGLECTING TO SUBMIT REPORTS
WERE SMALL TOWNS.
BUT SEVERAL LARGER CITIES WITH
HISTORIES OF RACIAL ISSUES ALSO
DIDN'T SUBMIT INFORMATION-
INCLUDING BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA;
JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI; AND BATON
ROUGE, LOUISIANA.
F.B.I. DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY HAS
CALLED ON LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES TO BE MORE AGGRESSIVE
IN TRACKING AND REPORTING HATE
CRIMES.
CLEANUP AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT IS
UNDERWAY IN NORTHERN EUROPE
WHERE THE DEATH TOLL HAS REACHED
AT LEAST 18 PEOPLE WITH A THIRD
PERSON CONFIRMED DEAD IN FRANCE.
THE FRENCH GOVERNMENT SAYS IT
FEARS MORE BODIES WILL BE
RECOVERED AS WATERS BEGIN TO
RECEDE FROM CITIES AND VILLAGES
THAT HAVE SEEN SOME OF THE WORST
FLOODING IN OVER A CENTURY.
FRENCH PRESIDENT HOLLANDE SAID
HE'LL DECLARE A STATE OF NATURAL
CATASTROPHE WHEN HIS CABINET
MEETS ON WEDNESDAY, WHICH WILL
TRIGGER COMPENSATION PACKAGES
FOR VICTIMS.
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
INSURERS IS ESTIMATING ALMOST
$700 MILLION IN DAMAGES IN
FRANCE ALONE.
THE DISTRICT OF WEILHEIM IN THE
SOUTHERN GERMAN STATE OF BAVARIA
DECLARED A STATE OF EMERGENCY
TODAY AFTER HEAVY RAINS
CONTINUED TO DRENCH THE AREA
OVERNIGHT.
LEARN ABOUT THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S EFFORTS TO
CLOSE THE GUANTANAMO BAY
DETENTION CENTER BEFORE THE
PRESIDENT LEAVES OFFICE.
READ THE REPORT ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THE REUTERS
NEWS AGENCY REPORTS THAT THE 17-
MONTH U.S. EFFORT TO TRAIN AND
BUILD UP THE IRAQI ARMY HAS
FALLEN SHORT.
CURRENT AND FORMER U.S. OFFICERS
AND OFFICIALS TOLD REUTERS THAT
DESPITE U.S. EFFORTS, THE ARMY'S
COMBAT CAPACITY HAS BARELY
IMPROVED AND THAT THE GOVERNMENT
RELIES TOO HEAVILY ON SHIITE
MILITIAS TO DO THE FIGHTING.
FOR MORE ABOUT THE READINESS OF
THE IRAQI ARMY, I AM JOINED VIA
SKYPE BY NED PARKER OF REUTERS,
WHO CO-WROTE THE REPORT.
GIVE US A LAY OF THE LAND HERE.
WHAT'S THE MIX BETWEEN THE IRAQI
ARMY AND THE MILITIAS?
WHO IS DOING THE FIGHTING?
>> IT'S A MIXED BAG REALLY.
THE IRAQI ARMY HAS ONLY FIVE
FUNCTIONING DIVISIONS ACCORDING
TO U.S. OFFICERS AND MOST
DIVISIONS ARE ABOUT 60 TO 65%
CAPACITY.
SO ON THE GROUND NOW, WHEN
FIGHTING HAPPENS, THE IRAQI
MILITARY HAS BASICALLY A
SHORTAGE OF LABOR.
AND THE ONE GOOD FIGHTING FORCE
THAT'S THERE, THAT'S EFFECTIVE
FROM THE STATE, IS THE IRAQI
SPECIAL FORCES.
AND ACCORDING TO U.S. OFFICERS,
THOSE FORCES ARE IN REAL DANGER
OF BURNING OUT BECAUSE THEY ARE
THE ONLY FORCE THE STATE HAS
BEEN ABLE TO RELY UPON TIME AND
TIME AGAIN OVER THE LAST TWO
YEARS.
SO THE OTHER FORCE FIGHTING
ALONGSIDE THE SPECIAL FORCES ARE
MILITIA GROUPS THAT MANY OF THEM
ARE FUNDED BY IRAN, THEY HAVE
HARD LINE SECTARIAN IDEOLOGY AND
HAVE BEEN DEEPLY CONTROVERSIAL.
ON THE GROUND, WHAT HAPPENS IS
MANY PLACES NORTH OF BAGHDAD IN
AREAS LIKE TIKRIT OR BEIJI THAT
HAVE BEEN TAKEN BY ISRAEL
FORCES, THE MILITIAS TAKE OVER.
LOCAL OFFICIALS, ORDINARY
CITIZENS SEE NOT THE STATE BUT
THE MILITIA FORCES AT THE
ULTIMATE POWER.
>> IN PART OF YOUR STORY YOU
ALSO TALK ABOUT THE SUPPLY CHAIN
AND THAT IT'S NOT ALL GETTING TO
THE IRAQI ARMY.
SOMETIMES THAT THE WEAPONS THAT
THE UNITED STATES IS SENDING IS
ACTUALLY GETTING TO THESE
MILITIAS.
>> WHAT HAS HAPPENED IS AS
SUPPLIES GO DOWN THE DEPOT SUCH
AS TAJI WHICH IS THE LARGEST
WEAPONS WAREHOUSE FOR THE IRAQI
MILITARY IN IRAQ ON BASES LIKE
THAT IF MILITIAS HAVE INFLUENCE
WHETHER THROUGH CORRUPTION OR
INTIMIDATION THEY CAN TAKE WHAT
THEY WANT.
U.S. OFFICERS I'VE SPOKEN TO SAY
THAT THERE WAS A HUGE EFFORT
LAST SUMMER TO TAMP DOWN ON THIS
AND TO STOP IT AND THERE ARE
VERY FEW CASES.
BUT IT STILLS STILL CONTINUES.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT'S THE
U.S. SUPPOSED TO DO IN THIS?
>> SOME OFFICERS SAY THAT THE
AMERICANS ARE NOT THINKING ABOUT
THIS ENOUGH AND AREN'T DOING
ENOUGH POLITICALLY TO PUSH THE
DEAL AND WHETHER YOU SPEAK WITH
U.S. MILITARY SPOKESMEN THEY'LL
SAY OUR JOB IS NOT TO POLICE
IRAQ.
AND THE MILITARY TRACK MOVERS
FAR FASTER THAN THE DIPLOMATIC
TRACK.
BUT THEN IF THE MILITARY TRACK
IS SHAPING A REALITY ON THE
GROUND, THAT IS ONLY FURTHER
ANTAGONIZING AND PUSHING SUNNIS
TO PERHAPS A NEW RADICAL FORCE
THAT COULD EMERGE AFTER THE
ISLAMIC STATE, THEN IT'S --
THAT'S A PROBLEM BECAUSE THE
POLITICAL SOLUTION IS SO FAR
BEHIND, THE NEW REALITIES ARE
CREATING PROBLEMS.
>> Sreenivasan: NED PARKER OF
REUTERS JOINING US, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: 17 STATES WILL
HAVE NEW VOTING REGULATIONS IN
PLACE FOR THE PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION THIS NOVEMBER.
TWELVE STATES WILL JOIN THE
RANKS OF THOSE REQUIRING VOTERS
TO SHOW A GOVERNMENT-ISSUED
PHOTO I.D., INCLUDING WISCONSIN,
NORTH CAROLINA AND TEXAS.
AND IN KANSAS AND OHIO, SOME
VOTERS ARE BEING REMOVED FROM
THE ROLLS.
FOR SOME INSIGHT INTO THESE NEW
REGULATIONS, YESTERDAY I SPOKE
WITH REUTERS NATIONAL AFFAIRS
EDITOR JASON SZEP.
>> YOU KNOW, THE IDEA THAT NEW
VOTER I.D. LAWS HAVE BEEN COMING
ON THE BOOKS I MEAN THIS IS
SOMETHING WE'VE BEEN HEARING
ABOUT REALLY ALMOST SINCE
PRESIDENT OBAMA GOT INTO OFFICE.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE NOW?
>> THE BIG DIFFERENCE NOW IS
2013 YOU HAD A SUPREME COURT
DECISION, THE SHELBY DECISION.
SINCE THE SHELBY DECISION STATES
YOU NO LONGER HAVE TO CLEAR ANY
KIND OF CHANGES TO VOTING LAWS
WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
SO WE'RE SEEING A LOT MORE
CHANGES TO THE LAWS, A LOT MORE
FRICTION OVER THIS ISSUE.
IN A NUMBER OF STATES.
AND A LOT MORE LITIGATION NOW
OVER THIS ISSUE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN OHIO THAT'S
DIFFERENT THIS CYCLE?
>> WELL, OHIO HAS A LAW ON ITS
BOOKS, IT'S HAD THIS LAW ON ITS
BOOKS FOR QUITE SOME TIME AND
THIS IS A LAW THAT ESSENTIALLY
MEANS IF YOU HAVEN'T VOTED FOR
THREE ELECTIONS YOU WOULD
AUTOMATICALLY BE PURGED FROM THE
VOTER REGISTRATION ROLLS.
THIS LAW HAS BEEN ON THE BOOKS
FOR QUITE SOME TIME BUT WHAT'S
DIFFERENT THIS YEAR IS YOU
HAD HUGE -- 2008 YOU HAD HUGE
TURN OUT, YOU HAD A LARGE NUMBER
OF AFRICAN AMERICANS VOTING.
MANY OF THOSE VOTERS ARE WHAT
ARE CALLED INFREQUENT VOTERS.
SAT OUT THE NEXT FEW ELECTIONS.
WHEN THEY GO TO THE POLLS THIS
TIME THEY'LL FIND THEY'RE NOT
REGISTERED.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT IN
KANSAS.
YOU HAVE TO PROVE YOU'RE CITIZEN
BEFORE YOU CAN VOTE.
WHY LAST IT BECOME SO DIFFICULT?
>> THE REQUIREMENTS TO REGISTER
IN ALL STATES ARE FOR THE MOST
PART, YOU SHOW AN I.D., AND YOU
SIGN A DOCUMENT THAT BASICALLY
SWEARS THAT YOU'RE A CITIZEN.
WHAT'S HAPPENING THIS KANSAS IS
THEY'VE TAKEN IT A STEP FURTHER,
AND REQUIRED PROOF CITIZENSHIP.
AND THEY'RE ACTUALLY THREE
STATES THAT HAVE THIS LAW ON
THEIR BOOKS.
KANSAS, GEORGIA, AND ALABAMA.
AND A LOT OF YOUNG VOTERS WERE
GETTING CAUGHT UP IN THIS.
A LOT OF YOUNG VOTERS WOULDN'T
NECESSARILY HAVE THE KIND OF
PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP DOCUMENTS
THAT THEY MIGHT NEED WHEN THEY
GO AND REGISTER AT A LOCAL SORT
OF DMV.
THERE HAS BEEN LITIGATION AROUND
THIS THAT A COURT RULED IN MAY
THAT THE DMVs SHOULD NO LONGER
REQUIRE YOU TO HAVE YOUR PROOF
CITIZENSHIP BUT IN KANSAS THE
LAW IS STILL IN EFFECT IN OTHER
AREAS STILL IN EFFECT FOR
EXAMPLE IF YOU WANT TO MAIL IN
YOUR... IF YOU WANT TO --
REGISTRATION OR IF YOU WANT TO
GO TO A DIFFERENT LOCATION, SORT
OF TWO TIER VOTING SYSTEM, WHERE
PEOPLE HAVE THE ABILITY TO VOTE
IN STATE ELECTIONS AND SOME
CAN'T, COUNTY OFFICIALS HAVE
DESCRIBED A SENSE OF CHAOS
AROUND THIS.
BUT IT HAS BEEN LITIGATED AND I
THINK THE CONCERN FROM THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY THE PEOPLE
WE'VE SPOKE TO ON THIS IS
THERE'S A CONCERN THAT IT WILL
BE USED AS A TEMPLATE IN OTHER
STATES, THIS -- AS A TEMPLATE IN
OTHER STATES, AND THIS WOULD
AFFECT YOUNGER VOTERS AND
UNAFFILIATED VOTERS.
ARE.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THIS
FOCUSED ON RACE OR PARTY?
FOR EXAMPLE IN TEXAS YOU CAN USE
YOUR CONCEALED CARRY PERMIT BUT
NOT YOUR STATE-ISSUED STUDENT
I.D.
>> THE ANSWER TO THAT REALLY
IS -- DEPENDS ON WHO YOU TALK
TO.
THE DEMOCRAT PARTY, OFFICIALS
SAY LOOK IT HAS A LOT TO DO WITH
RACE AND THAT HAS IN TURN A LOT
TO DO WITH PARTY.
BUT IF YOU TALK TO THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY OFFICIALS IN A
NUMBER OF STATES, THEY'LL SAY
LOOK THIS IS REALLY ABOUT FRAUD.
AND THERE ARE CONCERNS ABOUT
VOTER FRAUD AND TIGHTENING THE
RESTRICTIONS TO PREVENT THAT
FROM HAPPENING.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
JASON SZEP FROM REUTERS, JOINING
US FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS SO
MUCH.
AND FINALLY, WE'RE SADDENED TO
REPORT THAT AWARD-WINNING
NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO
PHOTOGRAPHER AND JOURNALIST
DAVID GILKEY AND HIS AFGHAN
TRANSLATOR WERE KILLED TODAY IN
A TALIBAN ATTACK IN
AFGHANISTAN'S HELMAND PROVINCE.
THE MILITARY DRIVER ALSO WAS
KILLED.
NPR AND MILITARY OFFICIALS SAY
THE TWO WERE RIDING IN AN AFGHAN
ARMY VEHICLE WHEN IT WAS HIT BY
TALIBAN ROCKET FIRE.
DAVID GILKEY JOINED NPR IN 2007.
AS ALWAYS, YOU CAN VISIT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR FOR MORE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION FOR
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.